JavaScript was created by Brendan Eich in 1995 during his time at 
Netscape Communications. It was inspired by Java, Scheme and Self.
Netscape, for a time, made the best browser in the world and enjoyed 
market dominance.

In late 1995, when Microsoft cottoned-on to the competitive threat the 
Web posed, the Internet Explorer project was started in an all-out 
attempt to wrestle control of the emerging platform from Netscape.

In so doing Microsoft became a mortal threat, compelling Netscape to 
respond. First, they started a standardization process to prevent 
Microsoft gaining control of the JavaScript language. Second, they 
partnered with Sun to leverage their shared interest in breaking the 
Microsoft monopoly.

Sun began development of Java in 1990 in an attempt to write a language 
for “smart appliances”. This approach floundered and in 1994, Sun 
regrouped and set sights on the Web as the delivery platform of choice.
So the Netscape/Sun partnership meant Sun acquired the use of a 
competitive browser and a delivery system for their strategic 
technology.

Netscape, on the other hand found a powerful ally against Microsoft. 
They also aimed to out-manoeuvre Microsoft by being the official browser 
of the highly anticipated platform that was Java.

Brendan Eich has said that with Sun on board, they decided to surf the 
tidal wave of hype surrounding Java and position JavaScript as the 
companion language to Java, in the same way Visual Basic was to C++. So 
the name was a straightforward marketing ploy to gain acceptance.

Netscape’s Mocha (later JavaScript) aimed to turn the web into a 
full-blown application platform. Furthermore, when used together with 
their LiveWire application server product, it would enable isomorphic 
development, with the same language used on both client and server.

If this sounds familiar, it is because this was exactly what Sun was 
attempting to pull off with Java. At the time however, the Web was very 
limited when compared to Java; for example, drawing pixels was not 
possible in JavaScript as it is now with canvas. So Sun (erroneously, I 
believe) never saw the language as a competitor and the alliance held.

Unfortunately for JavaScript, its early market positioning outlived its 
usefulness and later became a brake on market acceptance as it emerged 
as a viable technology in its own right.

So JavaScript was conceived of as a scripting language for the Web for 
both client and server side. It was then quickly re-positioned as a Web 
“companion” for Java. Unfortunately, together with the speed of its 
creation, this meant the inclusion of a number characteristics that 
would later be ridiculed. Such as:

automatic semicolon insertion (ASI)
automatic type coercion when using common operators like ‘==’
lack of block scoping
lack of classes
lack of dedicated modularisation capability
unusual inheritance (prototypical)
As we will see in later posts, many of these criticisms were often 
expressions of unfamiliarity or syntactic “taste” by programmers more 
familiar with other languages.

Summary
JavaScript has a rich and fascinating history. It continues to be one of 
the most hated languages on the planet, often for reasons that have long 
since faded into irrelevance.

LiveWire and the powerful nature of the language betray the true 
ambitions of Andreessen and the Netscape team, foreshadowing a possible 
future beyond being just a Java companion.

The huge companies that dominate the technical landscape have repeatedly 
tried to supplant JavaScript. First Sun, then Microsoft (VBScript), then 
Adobe, then Microsoft again (Silverlight), then Google, and then, 
arguably with TypeScript, Microsoft yet again. And yet JavaScript 
continues to thrive.

JavaScript has become the de-facto standard programming language of the 
Web, not only because of its first-mover advantage, but because it is 
open, standardized, and, most importantly a very good language; 
well-suited to the Web with its dynamic nature and tight integration 
with the DOM.

This series continues with Value types, reference types and scope in 
JavaScript.

My name is Ben Aston and thank you for reading my post today. I am a 
London-based JavaScript consultant, available for short-term consultancy 
globally. I can be contacted at ben@bj.ma.

If you would like to further develop your knowledge of JavaScript you 
might be interested in my hands-on training course. Full details can be 
found online at www.learnjavascript.london.

If you enjoyed this piece, please let me know by clicking the 
“recommend” button below.

You may also be interested in my post on closures in JavaScript.
